Introduction to the stress cycle.
Understanding what happens before behavior escalates.
Let me ask you something.
Have you ever been in a situation where everything seemed fine
and then suddenly it wasn't?
A young person reacts quickly,
the situation escalates,
and you're left trying to work out what just happened.
You may have seen that more times than you can count.
What's really going on here is something we call the stress cycle.
Now,
this is one of those concepts that
once you understand it,
changes how you see behavior completely
because behavior doesn't just appear out of nowhere,
there's always something leading up to it.
The stress cycle starts before you see anything obvious.
It might be a trigger,
something small,
a tone of voice,
a look,
a change in routine.
It might not mean anything to you.
But to the young person,
it does.
Then the body reacts.
You might not see it straight away,
but internally things are changing.
Heart rate increases,
breathing shifts,
tension builds.
They're moving towards that survival state,
fight,
flight,
or freeze,
and this is the point where we often miss it
because outwardly it might still look manageable,
but internally things are building.
Then we reach escalation.
This is where behavior becomes visible
anger,
refusal,
walking away,
shutting down.
And here's the key point
By the time you're seeing that behavior,
the stress cycle
is already well underway.
So when we step in at that point and try to reason,
question,
or challenge,
it often doesn't land
because the thinking part of the brain isn't fully engaged.
What this means in practice is simple
but important.
Timing matters.
If we intervene early
when we notice the small changes,
we can often prevent escalation.
If we miss that window,
we need to shift our approach.
At the peak,
it's not about talking things through,
it's about safety,
calm tone.
Clear presence
giving space.
Then after the peak,
the young person starts to come down.
You might see tiredness,
withdrawal,
sometimes even embarrassment or shame.
This is where real work can happen,
not in the heat of the moment,
but afterwards.
This is where reflection,
repair,
and learning take place.
Now here's where it links directly to safeguarding.
If we don't understand the stress cycle,
we can misinterpret behavior.
We might see defiance instead of distress,
noncompliance instead of overwhelm,
and that changes how we respond.
From a trauma informed perspective,
behavior is often communication.
The stress cycle
is the body telling us something isn't right.
Our role is to notice where the young person is in that cycle
and respond accordingly,
not react to behavior at face value.
But understand what's driving it,
because when we get that right,
we reduce escalation,
we build trust,
and we create emotional safety.
And that's where real progress happens.